---
layout: "post"
title: "Measure Q-factor on VNA"
permalink: "/qfactor/"
use-math: "true"
---

In order to measure the Q-factor on the VNA do the following steps:

1. Set the center frequency ($$ f_0 $$) to the respective channel.
2. Set the span to be 10% of the center frequency, 40 MHz for 1H at 400 MHz.
3. Go to the end of the span and note the values. let's say it is -0.5 dB.
4. Subtract 3 dB from that value. So you have -3.5 dB.
5. Go to -3.5 dB on each side of the center dip. Note down the values. Say they are $$ f_1 $$ and $$ f_2 $$.
6. Now $$ \Delta_{f,3dB}  =  abs(f_1-f_2) $$
7. Q = $$ \frac{f0}{\Delta_{f,3dB}} $$

Mail from Christian:

>we usually measure the 3dB bandwidth of S11 (reflection) on the network analyzer and calculate Q = f0 / ∆f3dB

>The problem with determining the 3dB bandwidth
>is that usually the baseline isn’t 0 dB because you never get full reflection of the forward power. That’s why we >usually set the span to 10% of the center frequency and look for the maximum of the curve. The we subtract 3dB from >this reference value and look for the two frequencies left and right the center frequency with this level of >reflection and calculate ∆f3dB = f-3db high – f-3dB low  from it.

>Keep in mind that 3dB is not the half height on a logarithmic scale.
>Some people also use the 6dB bandwidth what is more like the unloaded Q factor of a resonator.
>What you describe sounds more like a transmission type measurement (S21) that can be used in a two port mode but >hardly to measure the Q of a single probe channel.
>Then you’ll get a peak instead of a dip on the display and again you’ll never reach 0dB so you need to look for the >maximum value with a reasonable span (10%) and subtract 3dB.
>Attached there’s a good article about Q factor measurement that might help to give a deeper insight.

<object data="{{ "docs/assets/pdfs/qfact.pdf" | prepend: site.baseurl | prepend: site.url }}" width="1000" height="1000" type='application/pdf'/></object>